  MACBETH

                                      by

                              WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE



                              PERSONS REPRESENTED

 DUNCAN,    King of Scotland.          Seyton, an officer attending on MACBETH.
 MALCOM,    Son of DUNCAN.             Boy, Son to MACDUFF.
 DONALBAIN, Son of DUNCAN.             An English Doctor.  A Scotch Doctor.
 MACBETH,   General of DUNCAN'S Army.  A Soldier.  A Porter.  An Old Man.
 BANQUO,    General of DUNCAN'S Army.
 MACDUFF,   Nobleman of Scotland.      LADY MACBETH.
 LENOX,     Nobleman of Scotland.      LADY MACDUFF.
 ROSS,      Nobleman of Scotland.      Gentlewomen attending on LADY MACBETH.
 MENTETH,   Nobleman of Scotland.      HECATE, and the three Witches.
 ANGUS,     Nobleman of Scotland.
 CATHNESS,  Nobleman of Scotland.      Lords, Gentlemen, Officers, Soldiers,
 FLEANCE,   Son to BANQUO.             Murderers, Attendants, and Messengers.
 SIWARD,    Earl of Northumberland,
 and  General of the English Forces.   The GHOST of BANQUO, and several other
 YOUNG SIWARD, his Son.                APPARITIONS.

 Scene, - In the end of the Fourth Act, in ENGLAND; through the rest of the
          Play, in SCOTLAND; and chiefly at MACBETH'S Castle.


                                    ACT I.


                                   SCENE i.

                    An open Place.  Thunder and Lightning.

                            Enter three Witches.


111     I Witch    When shall we three meet again,
                   In thunder, lightning, or in rain?
        2 Witch    When the hurlyburly's done,
                   When the battle's lost and won.
        3 Witch    That will be ere the set of sun.
        I Witch    Where the place?
        2 Witch                     Upon the heath.
        3 Witch    There to meet with Macbeth
        I Witch    I come, Graymalkin!
            All    Paddock calls: -Anon!-
1110               Fair is foul, and foul is fair:
                   Hover through the fog and filthy air.

                             Witches vanish.


                               Scene ii.

                          A Camp near Forres

          Alarum within.  Enter King Duncan, Malcolm, Donalbain,
            Lenox, with Attendants, meeting a bloody Soldier.


121      Duncan    What bloody man is that?  He can report,
                   As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt
                   The newest state.
        Malcolm                      This is the sergeant,
                   Who, like a good and hardy soldier, fought
                   'Gainst my captivity. - Hail, brave friend!
                   Say to the king the knowledge of the broil,
                   As thou didst leave it.
        Soldier                            Doubtfully it stood;
                   As two spent swimmers that do cling together
                   And choke their art.  The merciless Macdonwald,-
1210               Worthy to be a rebel - for to that
                   The multiplying villanies of nature
                   Do swarm upon him, - from the Western isles
                   Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied;
                   And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling,
                   Showed like a rebel's whore.  But all's too weak
                   For brave Macbeth, - well he deserves that name, -
                   Disdaining fortune, with his brandished steel,
                   Which smoked with bloody execution,
                   Like valour's minion, Carved out his passage
1220               Till he faced the slave;
                   And ne'er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him,
                   Till he unseamed him from the nave to the chaps,
                   And fixed his head upon our battlements.
        Duncan     O valiant cousin! worthy gentleman!
       Soldier     As whence the sun 'gins his reflection
                   Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break;
                   So from that spring, whence comfort seemed to come,
                   Discomfort swells.  Mark, King of Scotland, mark:
                   No sooner justice had, with valour armed,
1230               Compelled these skipping kerns to trust their heels,
                   But the Norweyan lord, surveying vantage,
                   With furbished arms and new supplies of men,
                   Began a fresh assault.
        Duncan                            Dismayed not this
                   Our captains, Macbeth and Banquo?
       Soldier                                       Yes;
                   As sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion.
                   If I say sooth, I must report they were
                   As cannons overcharged with double cracks;
                   So they doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe:
1240               Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds,
                   Or memorize another Golgotha,
                   I cannot tell:--
                   But I am faint; my gashes cry for help.
        Duncan     So well thy words become thee as thy wounds;
                   They smack of honour both.--Go, get him surgeons.

                              Exit Soldier, attended.

                   Who comes here?
       Malcolm                     The worthy Thane of Ross.
         Lenox     What a haste looks through his eyes!
                   So should he look that seems to speak things strange.

                                  Enter Ross.

          Ross     God save the king!
        Duncan                        Whence cam'st thou, worthy thane?
1250      Ross     From Fife, great king;
                   Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky
                   And fan our people cold.
                   Norway himself, with terrible numbers,
                   Assisted by that most disloyal traitor
                   The Thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict;
                   Till that Belladona's bridegroom, lapped in proof,
                   Confronted him with self-comparisons,
                   Point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm,
                   Curbing his lavish spirit; and, to conclude,
                   The victory fell on us.
1260    Duncan                             Great happiness!
          Ross     That now Sweno, the Norway's king, craves composition;
                   Nor would we deign him burial of his men
                   Till he disbursed, at Saint Colmes-inch,
                   Ten thousand dollars to our general use.
        Duncan     No more that Thane of Cawdor shall deceive
                   Our bosom interest:--go pronounce his present death,
                   And with his former title greet Macbeth
          Ross     I'll see it done.
1270    Duncan     What he hath lost, noble Macbeth hath won.

                                  Exeunt.



                                 Scene iii.

                                  A Heath.

                      Thunder.  Enter the three Witches.


131    I Witch     Where hath thou been, sister?
       2 Witch     Killing swine.
       3 Witch     Sister, where thou?
       1 Witch     A sailor's wife had chestnuts in her lap,
                   And munched, and munched, and munched:
                   --Give me, quoth I:
                   Aroint thee, witch! the rump-fed ronyon cries.
                   Her husband's to Aleppo gone, master o' the Tiger:
                   But in a sieve I'll thither sail,
                   And, like a rat without a tail,
1310               I'll do, I'll do, I'll do.
       2 Witch     I'll give thee a wind.
       I Witch     Thou art kind.
       3 Witch     And I another.
       I Witch     I myself have all the other;
                   And the very ports they blow,
                   All the quarters that they know
                   I' the shipman's card.
                   I will drain him dry as hay:
                   Sleep shall neither night nor day
1320               Hang upon his pent-house lid;
                   He shall live a man forbid:
                   Weary seven-nights nine times nine
                   Shall he dwindle, peak, and pine:
                   Though his bark cannot be lost,
                   Yet it shall be tempest-tost.--
                   Look what I have.
       2 Witch     Show me, show me.
       I Witch     Here I have a pilot's thumb,
                   Wrecked as homeword he did come.

                            Drum within.

1330   3 Witch     A drum, A drum!
                   Macbeth doth come.
           All     The weird sisters, hand in hand,
                   Posters of sea and land,
                   Thus do go about, about:
                   Thrice to thine, and thrice to mine,
                   Peace!--the charm's wound up.

                         Enter Macbeth and Banquo

       Macbeth     So foul and fair a day I have not seen.
        Banquo     How far is't call's Forres?--What are these,
1340               So withered, and so wild in their attire,
                   That look not like the inhabitants o' the earth,
                   And yet are on't?--Live you? or are you aught
                   That man may question?  You seem to understand me,
                   By each at once her chappy finger laying
                   Upon her skinny lips:--you should be women,
                   And yet your beards forbid me to interpret
                   That you are so.
       Macbeth                      Speak if you can;--what are you?
       1 Witch     All hail, Macbeth!  hail to thee, Thane of Glamis!
       2 Witch     All hail, Macbeth!  hail to thee, Thane of Cawdor!
1350   3 Witch     All hail, Macbeth!  that thou shalt be king hereafter!
        Banquo     Good sir, why do you start; and seem to fear
                   Things that do sound so fair?--I' the name of truth,
                   Are ye fantastical, or that indeed
                   Which outwardly ye show?  My noble partner
                   You greet with present grace and great prediction
                   Of noble having and of royal hope.
                   That he seems rapt withal:--to me you speak not:
                   If you can look into the seeds of time,
                   And say which grain will grow, and which will not,
1360               Speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear
                   Your favours nor your hate.
       I Witch     Hail!
       2 Witch     Hail!
       3 Witch     Hail!
       I Witch     Lesser than Macbeth, and greater.
       2 Witch     Not so happy, yet much happier.
       3 Witch     Thou shalt get kings, though thou be none;
                   So, all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!
       I Witch     Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!
1370   Macbeth     Stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more:
                   By Sinel's death I know I am Thane of Clamis;
                   But how of Cawdor? the Thane of Cawdor lives,
                   A prosperous gentleman; and to be king
                   Stands not within the prospect of belief,
                   No more than to be Cawdor.  Say from whence
                   You owe this strange intelligence? or why
                   Upon this blasted heath you stop our way
                   With such prophetic greeting?--Speak, I charge you!

                              Witches vanish.

        Banquo     The earth hath bubbles, as the waters has,
1380               And these are of them:--wither are they vanished?
       Macbeth     Into the air; and what seemed corporeal melted
                   As breath into the wind.--Would they had stayed
        Banquo     Where such things here as we do speak about?
                   Or have we eaten on the insane root
                   That takes the reason prisoner?
       Macbeth     Your children shall be kings.
        Banquo                                   You shall be king.
       Macbeth     And Thane of Cawdor too; went it not so?
        Banquo     To the self-same tune and words.  Who's here?

                         Enter Ross and Angus

          Ross     The king hath happily received, Macbeth,
1390               The news of thy success: and, when he reads
                   Thy personal venture in the rebels' fight,
                   His wonders and his praises do contend
                   Which should be thine or his: silenced with that,
                   In viewing o'er the rest o' the self-same day,
                   He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks,
                   Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make,
                   Strange images of death.  As thick as hail
                   Came post with post; and every one did bear
                   Thy praises in his kingdom's great defense,
                   And pored them down before him.
13100    Angus                                      We are sent
                   To give thee, from our royal master, thanks;
                   Only to herald thee into his sight,
                   Not pay thee.
          Ross     And, for an earnest of a greater honour,
                   He bade me, from him, call thee Thane of Cawdor:
                   In which addition, hail, most worthy thane!
                   For it is thine.
        Banquo                       What, can the devil speak true?
       Macbeth     The Thane of Cawdor lives: why do you dress me
                   In borrowed robes?
         Angus                         Who was the thane lives yet;
13110              But under heavy judgment bears that life
                   Which he deserves to lose.  Whether he was combined
                   With those of Norway, or did line the rebel
                   With hidden help and vantage, or with both
                   He laboured in his country's wreck, I know not;
                   But treasons capital, confessed, and proved,
                   Have overthrown him.
       Macbeth                          Glamis, and Thane of Cawdor;
                   The greatest is behind [aside]. -Thanks for your pains.-
                   Do you not hope your children shall be kings,
                   When those that gave the Thane of Cawdor to me
                   Promised no less to them?
13120   Banquo                               That, trusted home,
                   Might yet enkindle you unto the crown,
                   Besides the Thane of Cawdor.  But 'tis strange:
                   And oftentimes to win us to our harm,
                   The instruments of darkness tell us truths;
                   Win us with honest trifles, to betray's
                   In deepest consequence.--
                   Cousins, a word I pray you.
       Macbeth                                  Two truths are told,
                   As happy prologues to the swelling act
                   Of the imerial theme [aside].--I thank you, gentlemen.-
13130              [aside] This supernatural soliciting
                   Cannot be ill; cannot be good:--if ill,
                   Why hath it given me earnest of suggest,
                   Commencing in a truth?  I am Thane of Cawdor:
                   If good, why do I yield to that suggestion
                   whose horrid image doth unfix my hair,
                   And make my seated heart knock at my ribs,
                   Against the use of nature?  Present fears
                   Are less than horrible imaginings:
                   My thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical,
13140              Shakes so my single state of man, that function
                   Is smothered in surmise; and nothing is
                   But what is not.
        Banquo                      Look, how our partner's rapt.
       Macbeth     [Aside.]
                   If chance will have me king, why, chance may crown me,
                   Without my stir.
        Banquo                       New honours come upon him,
                   Like our strange garments, cleave not to their mould
                   But with the aid of use.
       Macbeth     [Aside.]                  Come what come may,
                   Time and the hour runs through the roughest day.
        Banquo     Worthy Macbeth, we stay upon your leisure.
       Macbeth     Give me your favour:--my dull brain was wrought
13150              With things forgotten.  Kind gentlemen, your pains
                   are registered where everyday I turn
                   The leaf to read them.--Let us toward the king.--
                   Think upon what hath chanced; and, at more time,
                   The interim having weighed it, let us speak
                   Our free hearts to each other.
        Banquo                                     Very gladly.
       Macbeth     Till then, enough.--Come, friends.

                                  Exeunt.



                                  Scene iv

                                   Forres.

                            A room in the Palace.

                  Flourish.  Enter Duncan, Malcolm, Donalbain,
                            Lenox and Attendants.


141     Duncan     Is execution done on Cawdor?  Are not
                   Those in commission yet returned?
       Malcolm                                       My liege,
                   They are not yet come back.  But I have spoke
                   With one that saw him die: who did report,
                   That very frankly he confessed his treasons;
                   Implored your highness' pardon; and set forth
                   A deep repentance: nothing in his life
                   Became him like the leaving it; he died
                   As one that had been studied in his death,
1410               To throw away the dearest thing he owed,
                   As 'twere a careless trifle.
        Duncan                                   There's no art
                   To find the mind's construction in the face:
                   He was a gentleman on whom I built
                   An absolute trust.-

                 Enter Macbeth, Banquo, Ross, and Angus.

                                        O worthiest cousin!
                   The sin of my ingratitude even now
                   Was heavy on me: thou art so far before,
                   That swiftest wing of recompense is slow
                   To overtake thee.  Would thou hadst less deserved;
                   That the proportion both of thanks and payment
1420               Might have been mine! only I have left to say,
                   More is thy due than more than all can pay.
       Macbeth     The service and the royalty I owe,
                   In doing it, pays itself.   Your Highness?  part
                   Is to receive our duties: and our duties
                   Are to your throne and state children and servants;
                   Which do but what they should, by doing everything
                   Safe toward your love and honour.
        Duncan                                        Welcome hither:
                   I have begun to plant thee, and will labour
                   To make thee full of growing.--Noble Banquo,
1430               That hast no less deserved, nor must be known
                   No less to have done so, let me infold thee,
                   And hold thee to my heart.
        Banquo                                There if I grow,
                   The harvest is your own.
        Duncan                              My plenteous joys,
                   Wanton in fulness, seek to hide themselves
                   In drops of sorow.--Sons, kinsmen, thanes,
                   And you whose places are the nearest, know,
                   We will establish our estate upon
                   Our dearest, Malcolm; whom we name hereafter
                   The Prince of Cumberland: which honour must
1440               Not unaccompanied invest him only,
                   But signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine
                   On all deservers.--From hence to Inverness,
                   And bind us further to you.
       Macbeth     The rest is labour, which is not used for you:
                   I'll be myself the harbinger, and make joyful
                   The hearing of my wife with your approach;
                   So, humbly take my leave.
        Duncan                               My worthy Cawdor!
       Macbeth     [Aside] The Prince of Cumberland!--That is a step,
                   In which I must fall down, or else o'er leap
1450               For in my way it lies.  Stars, hide your fires!
                   Let not light see my black and deep desires:
                   The wink at the hand! yet let that be,
                   Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see.

                                    Exit.

        Duncan     True. worthy Banquo,--he is full so valiant;
                   And in his commendations I am fed,--
                   It is a banquet to me.  Let us after him,
                   Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome:
                   It is a peerless kinsman.

                                 Flourish.  Exeunt.



                                    Scene v

                                  Inverness.

                          A room in Macbeth's Castle.

                     Enter Lady Macbeth, reading a letter.


151  L. Macbeth    "They met me in the day of success; and I have learned
                   by the perfectest report, they have more in them than
                   mortal knowledge.  When I burned in desire to question
                   them further, they made themselves air, into which they
                   vanished.  While I stood rapt in the wonder of it, came
                   missives from the king, who all-hailed me 'Thane of
                   Cawdor'; by which title, before, these weird sisters
                   saluted me, and referred me to the coming-on of time,
                   with 'Hail, king that shalt be!'  This have I thought
                   good to deliver thee, my dearest partner of greatness,
                   that thou might'st not lose the dues of rejoicing, by
1510               being ignorant of what greatness is promised thee.  Lay
                   it to thy heart, and farewell."

                   Glamis thou art, and Cawdor; and shalt be
                   What thou art promised.--Yet do I fear thy nature:
                   It is too full o' the milk of human kindness
                   To catch the nearest way.  Thou wouldst be great;
                   Art not without ambition, but without
                   The illness that should attend it: what thou wouldst highly,
                   That wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false,
1520               And yet wouldst wrongly win; thou'dst have, great Glamis,
                   That which cries, "Thus thou must do, if thou have it";
                   And that which rather thou dost fear to do,
                   Than wishest should be undone.  Hie thee hither,
                   That I may pour my spirits in thine ear,
                   And chatise with the valour of my tongue
                   All that impedes thee from the golden round,
                   Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem
                   To have thee crowned withal.--

                               Enter a Messenger

                                                    What is your tidings?
      Messenger    The king comes here tonight.
   Lady Macbeth                                 Thou'rt mad to say it.
1530               Is not thy master with him? who, were't so,
                   Would have informed for preparation.
      Messenger    So please you, it is true; our thane is coming;
                   One of the fellows had the speed of him,
                   Who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more
                   Than would make up his message.
   Lady Macbeth                                    Give him tending:

                                Exit Messenger

                   He brings great news.  The raven himself is hoarse
                   That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan
                   Under my battlements.  Come you spirits
                   That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here,
1540               And fill me, from the crown to the toe, top-full
                   Of direst cruelty! make thick my blood,
                   Stop up th' access and passage of remorse;
                   That no compunctious visitings of nature
                   Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between
                   Th' effect and it!  Come to my woman's breasts,
                   And take my milk for gall, you murdering ministers,
                   Wherever in your sightless substances
                   You wait on nature's mischief!  Come, thick night,
                   And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell,
1550               That my keen knife see not the wound it makes,
                   Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark
                   To cry, "Hold, hold!"

                                 Enter Macbeth

                                            Great Glamis! worthy Cawdor!
                   Greater than both, by the all-hail, hereafter!
                   Thy letters have transported me beyond
                   This ignorant present, and I feel now
                   The future in an instant.
        Macbeth                               My dearest love,
                   Duncan comes here tonight.
   Lady Macbeth                                And when goes hence?
        Macbeth    Tomorrow, as he purposes.
   Lady Macbeth                               O! never
                   Shall sun that morrow see!
1560               Your face, my thane, is as a book, where men
                   May read strange matters.  To beguile the time,
                   Look like the time, bear welcome in your eye
                   Your hand, your tongue: look like the innocent flower
                   But be the serpent under 't.  He that's coming
                   Must be provided for;  and you shall put
                   This night's great business into my despatch;
                   Which shall to all our nights and days to come
                   Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.
        Macbeth    We will speak further.
   Lady Macbeth                           Only look up clear;
1570               To alter favour ever is to  fear.
                   Leave all the rest to me.



                                   Scene vi

                         The same. Before the castle.

                             Hautboys and torches.

               Enter Duncan, Malcolm, Donalbain, Banquo, Lenox,
                     Macduff, Ross, Angus, and Attendants.


161      Duncan    This castle hath a pleasant seat; the air
                   Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself
                   Unto our gentle senses.
         Banquo                            This guest of summer,
                   The temple-haunting martlet, doth approve,
                   By his loved mansionry, that the heaven's breath
                   Smells wooingly here: no jutty, frieze,
                   Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird
                   Hath made his pendent bed, and procreat cradle:
                   Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed
                   The air is delicate.

                              Enter Lady Macbeth

1610                                      See, see! our honoured hostess.--
                   The love that follows us sometime is our trouble,
                   Which still we thank as love.  Herein I teach you,
                   How you shall bid God yield us for your pains,
                   And thank us for your trouble.
   Lady Macbeth                                    All our service,
                   In every point twice done, and done double,
                   Were poor and single business to contend
                   Against those honours deep and broad, wherewith
                   Your majesty loads our house: for those of old,
                   And the late dignities heaped up to them,
                   We rest your hermits.
1620     Duncan                           Where's the Thane of Cawdor?
                   We coursed him at the heels, and had a purpose
                   To be his purveyor: but he rides well;
                   And his great love, sharp as his spur, hath holp him
                   To his home before us.  Fair and noble hostess,
                   We are your guest tonight.
   Lady Macbeth                                Your servants ever
                   Have theirs, themselves, and what is theirs, in compt,
                   To make their audit at your highness' pleasure,
                   Shall to return your own.
         Duncan                               Give me your hand;
                   Conduct me to mine host: we love him highly,
1630               And shall continue our graces towards him.
                   By your leave, hostess.



                                   Scene vii

                        The same. A room in the castle.

                             Hautboys and torches
                   Enter, and pass over the stage, a Sewer,
                 and divers Servants with dishes and service.

                              Then enter Macbeth.

                   [Aside]
171     Macbeth    If it were done when 't is done, then 't were well
                   It were done quickly: if the assassination
                   Could trammel up the consequence, and catch
                   With his surcease success; that but this blow
                   Might be the be-all and the end-all here,
                   But here upon this bank and shoal of time,
                   We 'd jump the life to come. --But in these cases,
                   We still have judgement here, that we but teach
                   Bloody instructions, which, being taught, return
1710               To plague th' inventor: this even-handed justice
                   Commends th' ingredients of our poisoned chalice
                   To our own lips.  He 's here in double trust:
                   First, as I am his kinsman and his subject,
                   Strong both against the deed; then, as his host,
                   Who should against his murderer shut the door,
                   Not bear the knife myself.  Besides, this Duncan
                   Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been
                   So clear in his great office, that his virtues
                   Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against
1720               The deep damnation of his taking-off;
                   And pity, like a naked new-born babe,
                   Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubin, horsed
                   Upon the sightless couriers of the air,
                   Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye,
                   That tears shall drown the wind. --I have no spur
                   To prick the sides of my intent, but only
                   Vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself
                   And falls on the other --
